been
selected Wednesday February 19th meeting
it is now 7:01 I believe if my time is
is right and um we'll call the meeting
to order like I said and we'll cite the
Pledge of Allegiance
please I pledge allegiance to the flag
of unit
States America the which stands stands
indivisible and justice for all
all okay so again calling this meeting
to order um I guess next we go to public
speak Eric do we do that
correct can I ask one question Eric on
the special budget meeting we don't do
additions or Corrections right we're
just sticking to our agenda as
is well anything budget related that's
towards that's for the upcoming budget
is fair topic of discussion
certainly okay thank
you all right so we'll go ahead and if
you don't
mind okay and Cheryl is joining us right
now so we give her a couple
seconds should have the treasurer on
board
great I see that
happening it looks like she's joined us
um Eric do you want to go ahead and ask
the members of the public or do I do
that uh either way is fine I doesn't
look oh yet we do we have one member of
the public that I can see yeah
all right I see Bob hamburger there
would you like to uh participate in
public speak
tonight I have nothing to add at this
time thank you thank
you I mean do we ask the other members
even if
they're you know the workers do we ask
them for
that like Chris do you have anything
you'd like to join to discuss or mention
at this point
Chris I don't this I don't know if you
guys can hear me is this working yes yes
oh good yeah no I have nothing to add
thank you though
thanks okay and Cheryl can you hear
us can you guys hear me yes yep okay I
fixed it no feedback either I mean
you're coming in that's great thank you
for joining us we had no idea but we
really appreciate it Happy too yeah
so again um like uh Mark just announced
that he's unable to start the meeting so
he'll be joining us I know that we have
and actually I'm sorry an CR did you
want to say something I mean you're part
of the meeting too thank you so much for
being here um I'm used to the format
that the town has usually followed the
last few years that I've been on the
board where I kind of listen and dissect
in my head you know think about the
budget because the board of Selectmen
has selected it has talked about it for
about four weeks in a row and then it
would be turned over to the board of
Finance so we're at this new experience
this year where we've had one combined
meeting so far where we did the overview
last week um and you know a lot of
things came up that we could think of at
that time and then tonight was another
joint
meeting um and you know questions
that'll come up or whatever so we hadn't
really put a plan together CU I feel
like we're all receiving the budget so
much earlier in the process than having
heard it or you know had some things
done to it already um that being
said I I guess I'll start off with a
couple questions since our Treasurer is
here um from that came up last week um
was I Eric I know that you did a re a
revision to the spreadsheet and I'm
assuming I know you spent a lot of time
with Cheryl is that going to be our
normal process like the two of you sit
together and work on this budget
spreadsheet or it went through you first
and then Cheryl went over and found a
few
things yeah and then Cheryl has
re-reviewed it uh yesterday so we have a
couple other changes
um um up to this point so usually at
some point in the process the board of
of Finance takes over the spreadsheet
and then runs with it and makes whatever
changes you want um at whatever point
the the commission wants to do that in
the process once you get done with the
joint meetings you know you certainly
can um it can either stay in my and
Cheryl's hands or you guys can uh you
know uh can modify it um it really
depends on on what you want to do at
this point thank you I think we'll wait
when Mark's with us to see what we'd
like to do I wanted to stay I think it
should stay I and and we'll open it up
to the board in one person making any
changes so far you and Cheryl and then
when we're ready to address things maybe
you will turn it over you're right I do
remember that
happening um I would like to say though
Chris has put a great deal of time and
effort into the spr spreadsheet also so
it's not just me and er Chris it's a
joint effort Chris has done a great deal
of work on the spread thank you no
that's good to know I think it's good
for all of us to know how the process
happens um you know and I think I saw
like her initials on something that she
had updated so that's
great I guess one question I have and
then I want to open it to the board um
for different questions since we have
them here did we take the figures like
we discussed
obviously we just went over everything
last week and then the the salaries that
are in there now like say the yearly
salaries for the employees we definitely
don't want to bring up names we're going
to do our best to just say positions did
those salaries those were actuals from
the year
before they would have been through the
budget yes if they were a salaried or if
they were hourly
the where you look at the um employee
cost have a combination of both and then
the
anticipated uh raises based on Union
contracts and things of that nature uh
we double check there is no plan
currently to have another increase in
minimum wage so that um has not been
factored in if all of a sudden the
governor decides to increase the
Connecticut minimum wage again well then
would we potentially have have an issue
but as of right now there is none but um
everything that we have currently is
there and I know that with this might be
a spreadsheet adjustment and we can
freeze pains and do whatever we're going
to do in Excel but probably down the
line once the 3% was decided on by the
BOS and you know we probably should get
rid of those middle columns it'd be
easier to see side by sides I would
think of last year's and then just you
know what this year's rate's going to be
that's just small that's on my end
because it's way we kept the 2% increase
you know all the different things that
could have happened um I want to open up
to the board because we do have Cheryl
here which is and and Chris too we
really appreciate you taking the time
Chris out of your you know I know you
work during the day so we appreciate you
being here darn I would have had a list
but um does anyone have any questions I
mean
for Cheryl you know specifically to
start with as the
[Music]
treasurer uh I don't have any questions
specifically to Cheryl but I guess from
uh a standpoint of Eric or Cheryl
whoever you said Eric that a few changes
were made um since the last time we
looked at this I was just wondering do
you plan to go through what those
changes were and highlight them for us
um I'm actually gonna have Cheryl go
through them because Cheryl's the one
that reviewed it again and made the
changes so i' feel more more comfortable
her talking you through those um either
she can share her screen or I can try to
share mine um I can see let me try we
all know I'm not very good at
this
um okay well it's I sent a request to
let me share my screen yep I gave you
the
permission okay so uh I'm going to share
number
two can share
do you guys are you able to see the
spreadsheet that's up it's starting yes
good job yep yep you got it yes yep I'm
gonna go closer do you guys all have it
yeah yes okay so
um what I I had received some
information before that um the new
community center uh that the board
wanted a separate tab for the community
center so I did go through and update
all the tabs and brought that in here
for the
board um while I was doing all of those
and bringing the new tab in I wanted to
also again make sure so it's a little
different this year for for everyone
we've tried to minimize any errors as we
all know there was an error um a formula
figure error last last year um so we've
worked extra diligently to make sure
that there's no errors hopefully in the
formulas this year so everything for the
most part is either linked to these
individual sheets here elections
registra what have you or they come
through next to the employee costs then
they flop over to employee benefits and
healthc care and murf so
everything is Linked In Between all of
those sheets then it all goes back to
the main budget sheet and if you were
you when you have the spreadsheet in
front of you I mean physically have a
copy of it and if you click on a
specific cell you'll be able to tell if
a number was entered or whether there is
a specific formula linking it to some
other place and we've tried to color
coordinate and tell everybody where
we're getting our information so yellow
means it's all over to the main sheet
there's a formula if it's gray don't
touch that we've already calculated the
formulas in this salaries are all linked
to the employee cost sheet then we have
links for murf and healthcare costs
because as we're making changes what we
found was that a change may be made in
the sheet here in each individual
department but because it wasn't linked
it wasn't going over to the employee
costs and then it wasn't going over to
the
main budget sheet so that I all spent
quite a little time making sure I did
find some issues um that we needed to
fix within the employee
costs one was and uh we put it here
overtime for the snow if we have any
snow for overtime it was on the
individual tab but it wasn't in the
employee cost so that meant that when we
came down to our total the Social
Security and Medicare wasn't calculating
potentially
correct we also had some issues with we
have multitude of or several different
places where we have clerks board
clerks um they were also they were in
these individual Taps but they weren't
in our main sheet so we wanted to make
sure and update that so they would all
be flowing over correctly so those are
mainly the changes I made making sure
that if they're going to be in here for
our snow overtime can I ask just one
question Cheryl on that why would a
clerk I I understand a clerk you want
were we because we needed the total
employee cost because I know clerks
wouldn't like filter into murf or Clerk
wouldn't filter in somewhere else what
correct right well in the employee cost
has nothing to do with M has to do with
the Social Security Medicare and then
our potential unemployment and things of
that nature right so a clerk I mean I
didn't know if it was treated as a
stipended position where they got like
no they're pay by hours Andor a specific
amount of money per okay per um meeting
and that's subject to Social Security
and Medicare so we want to make sure
that they're all
included okay hand thank you that's that
and then we added in the snow time into
the murf because overtime we estimating
our overtime at 23,000 and change maybe
in the 25 26 year well that the
corresponding
3,885 was on the individual sheet but it
wasn't coming over to the main sheet for
for the potential murf contribution from
the town so I went through and made sure
that and look it wasn't just me Chris
and I were on the phone moving this and
she was entering this in here and then I
went back and made sure that they were
all hopefully flowing correctly to our
main budget
sheet okay can one other follow-up
question can you remind me which
formula was the big error last last year
if you don't mind it was it was a
formula within the main sheet okay and
it had to just do with
um I have to try to remember where it
was it was sub toal tried to we tried to
put
subtotals um this year but last year um
and we Eric and I went over the
subtotals again together in the previous
budget um there was a subtotal but then
there was also when we added up when it
got added again a subtotal got added to
a subtotal so it was a change of about
40 something, yeah I remember thank you
okay all right that's great well it's
good to hear you know all the changes
that you made and you know both of you
with Chris helping and and making sure
it's you know correct and everything
filters where it needs to filter
um I did have a
question well anyone have any questions
so far for Cheryl as she's explaining
what she's done I have a
question go ahead Louise okay the one
that says um it's not on the screen
though but it was an unknown person for
the supervisor yes okay is that a range
or is that depending on uh the person's
expertise no it depends on who's hired
we don't know who it's going to be
so you mean mean for the overtime no no
for the
salary for the salary that going to be
is that set in stone or is that depend
on the person's uh I think that would be
more of an Eric question yeah are you're
talk you're talking about the Department
of Public Works supervisor yes so first
of all we don't know exactly whether Jay
is retiring or not he's has not made a
final decision but presuming he makes a
final
decision um we would have to start with
interviews um you know and then once we
selected somebody try to make uh try to
figure out what yes what uh we could
sign them
for so that could go up or
down Gally I mean probably we wouldn't
be looking to increase it but okay you
know
and I think I last week we talked about
and I asked this question with the town
clerk position
obviously Carol has officially sorry the
town clerk has officially retired at
this point Eric
and uh I'm going on that assumption okay
and I know we're budgeting for next year
going forward and you know that the
board of Selectmen came on last week and
they explained what they're trying to do
in that position and it sounds like our
former town clerk is is willing to come
on as a consultant or something so I
know there's a lot of variables within
that line I'm assuming I'm assuming
what's on the spreadsheet now is
filtering like we said not with the
stien the stien was a good decision I
think by the board of Select by the
board of finance that year to reward a
person who had been in that position for
a lot of years and that's why you know
if that person ever left there would be
a lower salary Point um so the stien's
gone but I'm assuming the salary and
everything that's in there is filtering
into all of those
things yes okay right now we at this
time for the town clerk
correct oh I think we kept it at the the
level it would have been and Cheryl I
know you'll know if you look at this
here the projected is no stien for the
town clerk right right oh yeah I'm not
worried about the stien we knew wasn't
you know that's gone at least at this
all right the stien would come back if
someone got hired in that role for with
10 or more years that was the the
background excuse me julan wasn't a
stiping related to the additional hours
that they had for elections or something
like that not on that particular one
bill that particular stien for the town
clerk was definitely because there was a
lot of discussion on raises for for that
position at the time so the stien was
created a few years back and it was
definitely we would say the town clerk
ever retired because we knew this day
was coming we didn't want to be married
to the high level salary if someone
brand new had come in so we thought it
was fair to offer that particular styen
for someone that was 10 years plus of
experience it was around the $6,000
range sorry I can't my eyes don't see
this small line um but whatever it was
at the time 5,000
something yeah but the elections and
things there's stipulations with more
work unless I'm wrong does someone else
think the stien was related to that I'm
pretty sure it was the longevity CL
clause for the town
clerk Eric do you know about that
because I could have sworn that was
something to do with the additional hour
she was working over the new election
laws for early voting and all that
so uh um I'll be honest that was I
wasn't particularly worried about that
because the the town clerk as an elected
official isn't really under my control
at all so I kind of stayed out of any
discussions relating to compensation for
elected officials as far as I understand
you know part of the argument she was
making is that she put in an awful lot
of hours for the town hall um both on
elections and and many other projects
which is certainly true I mean there was
a lot to the backing of wanting a raise
you know I think there and and Bill
you're probably right when she came
forward and she you know pled her case
or whatever was talking to us she did
bring forth a lot of things that she's
doing so I might not remember that thing
I I remember why we decided on a stien
and how we Justified it so that was with
keep keeping it as a line item for a
salary item and everything else if the
person hired had 10 years or more of
experience but there was a lot of backup
for her raise in
general okay that's not how I remember
it but I'll I'll drop it for now okay oh
yeah there's no I mean my only point is
moving forward anyway she has retired at
this point or she's going to retire
she's no long she won't be there in July
that's for sure with the new budget so I
was asking Cheryl if we had kept that
that one line and it's feeding into murf
because we'll have to that'll be a a
talking point for the board of Finance
moving forward it is not it's it's not
calculated into any of the salaries oh
it's not no you you took the 6,000 out
no I'm not even talking about the stapen
I'm sorry I sorry I I think we're I know
the sten's gone I'm talking about her
salary line absolutely yes absolutely
yeah thank
you and I guess since are the two of you
planning on staying the whole meeting or
should we try to get our questions any
questions that we might have to you we'd
probably try to get at the beginning
Cheryl nope I'm I'm here until you cut
me loose
okay whatever the board's pleasure
right okay so a couple other things I
question go
ahead I had a question about about this
tab uh first of all
I'm a little concerned that it's out
there in the public and I think we
should
be hiding employee names just my feeling
but um aside from that um when I went
through in that particular
tab is one
of in the current salary amounts are
look like they were manually entered
and I kind of did some calculations to
the side just to make
sure you know you're breaking up just a
little
bit correctly and I found um a number of
discrepancies on
that I know I have a terrible connection
here um wonder if I should try to call
in can you hear me it's very broken up
and uh pixelated I guess you'd call it
or it's going in and out of a little bit
Liz do you mind if I interject your
thought because I know
you because I I think you might be
frozen I'm not sure Cheryl just for
something to think on Chris who whoever
had put that's what I wanted to know
with when I asked you guys about the 24
25 salaries that were there when you
compare them to what's in the Union
contract um I'm not sure if they're
all you know what's there and then I
know Liz had mentioned that when she did
some calculations like say taking
whatever the salary was last year
putting the 3% in there it doesn't seem
to compute for her I will I will double
check I made a notation for myself to
double check the calculations for the
employee C
sheet that's great and so thank you and
then the the whatever populated the
current salary for people that are union
employees and we understand they're rate
that can't change it's in a binding
document are all of those correct
according to you all of what this year
salary for those positions I don't want
yes they should be I I will double check
with Chris again I know she's on but I
know um she's muted so I will certainly
double check with her again but okay oh
yeah I did double check all those
figures uh there was a mathematical
error in the Union contract last year
which would make um a little bit of a
difference in the
salaries right and I don't thank you for
that I mean because I'm looking that I
did like I said I would have prepared a
lot more things that I could see instead
of at the screen but when I look at some
of the salaries and I don't want to say
them out loud here you know of what
people you know what the salary says on
this contract document so maybe I'll
just ask for a newer document or the Rev
is has the have the contract's been
revised so maybe I'm looking at an older
document the Union contract well the new
ones are out right so I'm looking at the
asme contract that ends June 30th
2026 so okay so the the one that ended
20 what was it 2024 had mathematical
errors and I believe that going forward
it did as well because they did not
catch their error but I can double check
that and get back to you no problem
Chris I appreciate that so when you say
mathematic because that's a big deal I
mean I'm a union member myself so say
were you saying an hourly rate was wrong
in a document that was approved correct
there was a they made a mathematical
error at the end page right and that's
the big page that's the page everyone
looks at when you're so did they was
it you know over a dollar an hour more
or something I don't remember I don't
remember off the top of my head and was
it in all of the positions or just one
or two uh Joan I'm not too sure I don't
have the documentation in front of me
but I can certainly research it and get
back to yeah because we don't want to
make a big deal about any kind of
calculations that are wrong if we don't
have the you know so that's all I'm
getting at so thank you for for letting
know but y would that have made an
adjust it sound and like not pressuring
you not this is just we're taking
advantage of having you we didn't know
we were going to you know we didn't know
you guys were going to be forward so I'm
just coming up with these as I think of
them and like Liz did
so um did it make an impact so did it
make an mathematical error of a 3%
increase and they didn't properly add
the
3% then that that's where the error was
they didn't properly add the 3% so their
Figures were wrong so therefore if you
were just going off the back page rather
than actually doing the math that's
where the discrepancy came in no I and I
follow that because I've been doing a
lot of math no I thank you thank you for
that because and that's why we're trying
to make it make sense because I'm like I
know what the starting salary was for a
position so there wouldn't have been a
mistake there so it's easy to do 3% on
something and it just seemed a lot
higher than if even if it was three o'
3% across the board so I don't know if
Liz has I don't want to steal lizz's
questions on this but it sounds like
there was some kind of error at some
point so there had to be some
adjustments so that's why if we're
seeing things that are different than
what we expected that would be it but I
yeah Li can I jump can I jump yeah can I
jump in and try it again how does it how
does it sound now yeah I can hear you
sounds better that's better
Liz okay thanks Bob Hamburg um so if we
I'd like to go back to the employee cost
t because that's where I was finding the
calculation errors and you can tell me
if what I'm showing you but okay I'll
I'll give you some line numbers um so if
you look at line number for instance
number
36 and you see 24 I'm
sorry I'm sorry on on the first page
that we're all looking at right now just
want to make sure we're all looking at
the same page and employee cost oh yeah
employee cost yep yep so for for
instance the the in column e row
36 manually entered was the salary
number but if I calculate this hourly
rate times 40 hours for 52 weeks I don't
come up with that number I come up with
a different number and I find that same
problem um in the following one two
three the following three lines and then
it skips a couple
lines and and then it
goes like on several a lot of these
lines I ran into that problem
so
um Liz were you on the call when my
Chris had said well sorry I won't
interrupt your question she's going to
get back to us on some of the rates some
of the rates weren't right in the
published documents for the
town um some of the some of the hourly
wages were not
correct is they weren't represented in
the Union contract correctly so they
found the error and they based some
things on that but it might your
questions might be different so I'm
gonna I just want to make sure you know
that so we'll have to okay put pause on
some of it because we'll wait to get the
corrected
document okay so maybe that will maybe
um maybe that does take care of this but
I I think it would probably make sense
for somebody to go through this column e
and make sure
that the calculations are correct um
based on whatever that
um contract whatever that contract was
that's all
um Cheryl yes it's Louise would that
have impacted the benefits costs at
all well the benefit costs are
calculated on a um
payroll basis
so if we've got somebody who's got is
over because they extra time extra snow
people come in people go out the benef
all I can calculate benefits on during
the budgets cycle is what we're
anticipating it's going to be um but
could a could could we have an issue in
2425 we could but we've also have new
people in and people have left and it
could happen yes
I was more talking about the error and
the um the
salaries you mean from the Union
contract yes errors could it have a
impact on the murf potentially sure yeah
because they we contribute and the
employee has to contribute in some cases
depending on where they are in the murf
so if you'd like let me go over I'm
going to come over to healthcare and
murf these are the only employees
currently or the only positions if you s
well that are potentially subject to
murf not every single employee that we
have is subject to the murf
calculations does that help at
all that does Louise hopefully that
helped I mean I think yes there's going
to be some adjustments you would think
if it's not much money or different
different rates that didn't affect it
too much you know it's I don't think
that part's going to be too bad or too
too big of a change but it's nice that
they're both going to take a look at it
make sure the right rates are there and
then we can have the correct rates of
that I don't want to get too bogged down
into this but having Cheryl here I had a
couple questions for her um because it
came up the last meeting and Eric was
nice enough to mention it with the murf
um we I'm glad to see cuz
I had corresponded with you in the past
about the fee that people get the fee in
Li of taking the
insurance that's not in the calculation
for murf or anything for an employee
Eric clarified that for all of us and I
think Sherl you had told me that before
um yeah thank you and then the
additional stiens this was a question
that came up last week that some of the
employees get I think Eric said that
that and all accept it it's part of
their total compensation
package and so that does reflect murf
correct that would be correct it's it's
part of their compensation yes the other
one is a non- taxable potential benef
well it's a benefit right right they're
getting extra and then the um yeah not
everyone pays the stiens the same way
but but it's been researched and I I
accept that that makes sense for what's
happening here um in your history Cheryl
I'm going to ask you the thing that I
questioned Eric about last night and
like I said not getting too much bogg
down
um and I think it'll get discussed
further down the line the the stiens
that people are given the reason that
they were created these extra jobs have
you um that you know Eric didn't want to
advertise and bring on a full-time or a
part-time person to do a little bit of
work that was there in the town hall so
he found people within the town hall
that took on these extra duties those I
find a hard time and I will talk to it
again that those I don't think should be
getting raises every year I think it's
become the norm as Eric's put this
spreadsheet together because it's not
really a job per se I think it's a
stipend to do a certain amount of work I
think it could be and Cheryl I'm using
your expertise it could be given a
dollar amount and just stay there I
don't mind that it or I'm not against
and I understand why it would get murf
and it's a total compensation but EV
these are stiens or additional things
they don't need to be in the raise
column every year am I right on that
Cheryl I don't agree with you um if
people are receiving a stien for extra
work that they're
doing because we are have chosen to
bring have an employee e that's already
part of the Town structure take on
additional duties the duties just keep
going on so you know you just so you
give somebody a a stien and the next
thing you know they've got this extra
Duty and that extra Duty so no I I
personally don't agree with you if we're
lucky enough to have someone that's
willing to do a
stien and um to show we're we're not
talking hundreds of thousands of dollars
in stiens
and even if it's A1 thousand increase
not that I'm making L of a thousand but
you know it equals out to be you know
$16 in change in murf or and I
appreciate and I'm putting myself out
there too and this is what I do for the
town as an elected person and I that's
why I don't mind asking you the
questions because I do value your
opinions too and you've always you know
gave us the right answer I get that and
a stip in from I work in personnel and
benefits and things like that so deal
with these all the time and so stiens in
those cases are given to employees that
want to earn and I I'll give you the
backside and like I said I'm putting
myself out there too it's not popular
it's nothing against the person I like
all the people that are there but a stip
in generally is an extra Duty that
people are given and they earn extra
money that's great that people want to
take it on there but they also usually
do it outside their normal hours
everywhere I've been involved I'm fine
and I think it's great that our little
town will let our employees get that
added benefit of doing it within their
workday which is never happens that I've
seen so that's an extra benefit that hey
you're going to get your regular salary
you're going to earn this extra stip in
and you're going to get to do it within
these same hours we're not going to make
you work extra hours if you can get it
done so I just had a problem with it it
didn't seem right for me that it was on
the same level I don't mind it going
into their total compensation but then
being on the same line as it's not even
in the contract but they get like 3%
every year again I know this is going to
look nitpicky but this is why I'm on the
board to ask these questions with
knowledge of things I know so that's my
side of it um and then these were extra
jobs where Eric didn't want to hire a
full-time person and have to pay the
benefits and everything but as we add
positions to our little town you know
there might be other places those stiens
can go sorry I so that's that's my side
of it so I don't think there's you're
saying there's not a law Cheryl that
requires it gets a raise every year not
that I'm aware of okay so what except
for Union contracts or something of that
nature exactly they're not in the
contract that I again I don't I'm not
the bad guy here I don't want to fight
over a little bit but this has raised
every single year in a big way that's
all Joan remember both the people that
are currently getting stiens yeah are
union employees yeah and you cannot
unilaterally assign a union employee
additional work
requirements without negotiating that
with the Union and if you think you're
going to get the union to agree that
that doesn't index with their
salary you know you're probably not GNA
succeed right and Eric I only speak of
things that I'm sure of because I've sat
on both sides of the table as you know I
sat with you on the management side and
I'm
certainly you know on the union side and
happy for anything that people get of a
union I just want to bring it up with
Cheryl here
because it usually when there are into
positions like this they would be listed
in a Union contract and then people bid
on them I get it we're a small town I
just wanted to know because it seems
like some of the jobs are on the small
side we're we're very glad like Cheryl
said that town employees would want to
take them on but like I said there are
the benefits of getting them done during
the regular day and they're getting a
good sizable decent amount of a stien
that's all I just going for all the
questions that we've had or that were
brought up last week
um yeah and so every year I've watched
you give whatever increase to that and
these things steadily go up all right
I'm going to move on from does anyone
have any follow-up questions on that as
far as for Cheryl I just don't think
there's laws on it again I'm glad you
know it's it's hard to be in this spot
again we we all know each other we know
people at the town it's not about that
it's just getting the correct
information with as we have to look at
these benefits and the employee piece is
a huge piece of the budget that we look
at every year Joanne can I just say
something please sure sorry I couldn't
see you Kim there you are go ahead Kim I
I just wanted to say that I think you
bring up all good points and I really
appreciate that this is getting talked
about you know I I kind of agree with
you I think if you're GNA get a stip in
for a separate job that you know
potentially you should be working that
position
in separate
hours that's all I appreciate it I mean
these are things that have to be talked
about and we have to get the corre
information and and they go up every
year and this is no secret because it
was talked about in the board of
Selectmen meeting I think they're
bringing another person back to do some
Consulting and do some work at the Town
Hall so who knows if some of these stien
things can go there not trying
it's never easy when you're talking
about salaries and things like that so
I've made my point I appreciate Cheryl
um your input on
that um but it's but it's good for the
employee too because they don't have to
work extra hours to get the extra pay
and all of the other things all right I
guess we'll does anyone have any more
questions on any of the employee things
that are out here before we move on to
other areas
sorry I can't see everybody because
um but please feel free to speak out if
anyone has questions let's see all right
there we
go and all right so moving on from that
you know Mark's not here and I thought
my thought with tonight's meeting was we
were going to kind of set our format for
how everyone wanted to proceed um you
know I didn't prepare ahead of time so I
was going to kind of listen to his
Direction but
I don't know you know I want to put it
out there for
everyone with Cheryl still here with us
I know we're going to have certain weeks
that we talk about different parts of
the budget um we can certainly bring
questions forward to Eric Tonight Eric
are you at our next
meeting uh yes I will be at the
meeting today is let me just pull up my
calendar today is the 19th I will make
the meeting on the 26th and I'll make
the meeting on the 5th I will be gone on
the 12th and I will be back on the
19th okay I will be doing the 12th for
in place of Eric great oh good cherl I'm
writing that
down we appreciate that um so I go ahead
I think one of the things to think about
is I mean I I think we we ought to keep
track of the big picture um if we're
going to make if you're going to make
significant cuts to the
budget um it's likely to be in capital I
mean we all kind of acknowledge that
that's where you know in the town H or
in the budget there's a significant
amount of
money most of the line items in the
budget are fairly immobile you know
we're not going to sure you could trim a
little bit off of something but if
you're going to make a significant
difference it's going to end up being in
a capital line um I'm certainly prepared
to talk about the capital lines um if
you want to I I just I don't know what I
want to maximize your time um I agree
Eric I appreciate you jumping in there I
was going to ask the board too I agree
we we can move to that in a moment but
in this particular meeting I kind of
wanted to ask I feel like at these
meetings we've all kind of given an
overview like you said of what we
thought I know Robert's been a member of
the board for a long time I don't want
to you know so I thought that like you
said Mark was kind of gonna set okay
tonight we're we know we have the Board
of Ed coming on the 19th of March we're
going to invite
Ram um I know my thoughts on like you
said the big picture but I don't need to
hear myself talk all the time so I
didn't know if any of the board members
you know this is let's face it this is a
huge increase all over I'm just goingon
to have to say it because you know
Mark's not here to run the meeting I
didn't have any kind of dialogue planned
but it's our job as the board of finance
and I feel like we've all kind of talked
before at our meetings of our thoughts
so we can dive into you thinking the
capital and I I agree I mean because the
increase is so big this
year you know I don't want to presume
whether it'll pass or not pass but it's
our job to put forward a budget that we
think can pass and this is the biggest
one we've faced since I've been on the
board so right to remember that the
state of Connecticut cut our ECS money
by almost
$90,000 that's certainly a reason for
the increase part of your increase
State caught us from 2 million in change
down to we got that notification in
February let me get up there and show it
to you the education cost sharing Cheryl
that you see yes they did okay they went
down by almost 90 just 89,000 and change
that's the the last update we have from
the governor's budget that I updated on
25 got came through that he's
potentially going to cut all towns and
that's the portion for Handover so add
immediately
$90,000 on to the total
portion everything else yeah I no I hear
you there's plenty of reasons and plenty
of things that that you know are added
in the budget or or needed and
necessary um so yeah I don't know board
board of Finance members does do anyone
want to come forward again that's my
thought I thought we when we do have our
meetings and we get going obviously
we're going to have to look at it we're
going to have to we can bring some
departments in if we'd like to do we're
going to have the school present their
budget we're going to have Ram come we
know that it's more of a
presentation um I don't know again that
was just my quick synopsis of an overall
is that it's a huge ask this year and I
just know this town that's all so is not
wrong with if there's going to be Cuts
but I don't want to presume that
everyone feels the same way and that
it's going to have to be looked at from
all angles Rob do you want to give your
overall on what you're thinking yeah I
mean U thank you I think you know
obviously it's a big increase and we
we're gonna have to get it down uh I
don't think I that's my take um I'll
just flat out say it I don't think it's
pass in its current form so in the past
if memory serves what we did to start
off was we asked Eric to kind of run
down the 5 to 10 biggest
drivers and you know worked our way
through those obviously we're going to
go line by line eventually through the
whole thing but I think we we tried to
use that as a way of narrowing our focus
at least in the beginning to what are
the things that are really pumping this
budget up and what can be done about
them right um and then we can kind of go
from there and you know at the end of
the day we we we grind ourselves down to
where we're we're haggling over 500
bucks somewhere in the bus but we want
to look at
something impactful if we're looking at
it you know an 8% increase or whatever
this is and we want to get it down say
four uh you know these are just numbers
but uh I'm picking out of the out of the
air but I think that's my gut take is I
like to go to start like big picture
what are the big drivers and then kind
of drill
down I appreciate that bill do you want
to add your thoughts your over I just
think it's good if we all
say I'm aligned with Rob right there I
couldn't agree more I I couldn't agree
more that's how I think we've done it in
the past I've already heard um well I I
could tell you that I know from living
here in town a 2% Mill increase is going
to be very tough to get by so there's
work to be done here um I'm always
cautious and I think we should go to
Eric and say please where are the big
hitters that we can be looking at uh
obviously when you looking at employees
you're looking at certain areas of this
that can't be touched they're immovable
so what can be moved and what are the
big items that will make difference I
think I would also caution and this is
just my thoughts of trying to get this
budget to the absolute bare minim it
could be because even at a a 1% increase
it may not pass a one mill increase and
if you have to go back to the mill again
and you've already cut everything there
is to cut out it's like then you're
going to cut into things that are
important and that shouldn't be cut so I
think you have to be careful just about
how much at this first pass and that's
just just my thoughts
anyways you know when you're starting to
Wile this thing away we might have to
come back a second time is all I'm
thinking about and so I get nervous
about sometimes if you try to get this
to Absolute bare low because if it
doesn't pass and yet I come pack it's G
to be more hurtful I
think oh right I'm probably getting out
I I appreciate what uh what you and Rob
have said and I agree that's the way we
should go and I think listening to Eric
you know point out some of the big
hitters is definitely the right way to
start and then drilling down after that
into the line by line right and I just
want to add I guess my thought too is
just an overall thought is that I know
we've been ambitious in the past with a
lot of projects on the table and this
might be the year if that helps us as we
listen to Eric and drill down to kind of
complete some of those projects that are
already Grant funded and that have kind
of been on the back burner instead of
taking on anything new so maybe that
could help us that's just a thought I
have he may not agree with that how
about Kim or Liz or Louise would you
like to just give your overview go ahead
Kim um I I kind of agree with what
you're saying Joanne I I think maybe
putting a pause on new big projects and
wrapping up some of the ones that we
have going on and then going into kind
of a maintenance program for the town I
think everything that Eric has done is
wonderful but we do have to be able to
maintain all this wonderful stuff and
afford it so you know let maybe just
finish some stuff up and then I I would
just like to make sure that we have
maybe a presentation from the far
Department I know that they have a big
ask this
year um and personally that's probably
my biggest concern about all of this and
will Public Works come on or does Eric
pretty much represent them you would
like Jay Tuttle here you you're the
board of Finance you can have anybody
you want in the town appear before you
um it's certainly you just tell me who
you want hear from and when and I will
uh arrange that Eric that's what we're
going to do we're going to listen to
everyone's thoughts good point Kim I
think definitely we'd like to have
public works here one time and we'll get
our dates out and we'll we'll put forth
because I want to know if there's any
other departments too um thank you that
we want to see I I agree with Kim Fire
Department Public Works you know the big
ones there you know it's been great to
be able to ask Cheryl a few of these
questions tonight that came to mind um
go ahead Kim do you have more um I think
that's it for right now thank you Joan
okay great um Liz would you like to
add um yeah I'm in favor um with doing
the uh The Heavy Hitters first and
trying to see where we can cut back um I
think at some point we probably will
have to go a little line level but um I
I'm just concerned because the budget
increase last week last year was just so
high and I think
maybe we're feeling that pinch maybe
this year um to make last year's budget
kind of the um the level set and to go
from there I think that's why it's maybe
going to be more difficult this
year I agree when you look at the EXP
expense line you know the the little bit
of prep that I did before as far as
things you know expenses only this year
between our three you know between the
town RAM and AES or what whatever Eric's
math was on the spreadsheet and
everybody that worked on the spreadsheet
the expenses only are up $
64,65 from last year um there's things
that will help bring that down but
that's when you just go the expenses for
the town you know so so to have that be
the norm that was a good point because
last year was a 16% increase I think on
the town side I there was so many
numbers flying around okay Louise would
you like to or Liz are you all set sorry
no no that's um that's all for now I
just wanted everyone to get their their
their say because I do remember we've
all done that you know and I don't want
to assume that everyone you know but
everyone seems to be of the same mindset
so far that they think this is a big ask
to pass through the town you know the
town that we live in so so so I I Echo
what you guys have said um it would be
nice though to get our answers our
questions answered by those that are um
pending at this point so we have
everything in front of us when we
actually go through the budget and I'm
basically speaking about AES you know if
there's any outstanding type of
questions' be nice to get that
straightened out before
and so for the record no matter how much
you cut the town you can't balance the
budget um overall I mean the overall
mill rate increase right now is about
8% um but the town only owns a little
over a 100,000 of that the rest is the
school system and the changes that the
state imposed on municipal ities um and
how the mill rate is calculated so
there's and I would also note that the
town budget increase is still less than
the inflation rate this year so I
wouldn't say that it's exactly out of
line um but I I would say there are
areas that could be cut just understand
that you know when you start cutting
Capital you affect projects and but
sometimes it has to be
done thank you Eric and no one really
wants you know everyone wishes we could
keep everything all the time you know
and we're just going to have to work our
way through it as you said um it's just
there was a on the town side like you
said there was a 16% increase last year
so now that is seen as the norm so
putting together the
2year you know increases a lot it's a
lot to to take but um we'll go through
it thank you everybody that has Mark
joined us I can't see everyone's faces
there has Mark been able to he said he
might join us but I don't see him so
um without you know should we allow Eric
to go through I guess Eric um you are
going to start on the capital I had one
question about elections in general
because that came to mind as we're
looking at the main spreadsheet do
it seemed like there was an increase
there again I know we're not at the line
by line but do do those
increases is there a lot of work in a
non you know presidential election
year uh that's a question you should be
asking the elections officials directly
because that um the elections budget
gets passed to you straight from what
what uh Linda Derek and and Wall-E
provided if you would like I can send
forward to the board their supporting
documentation um in fact I'm happy to
send you the supporting
documentation for every board in
commission and entity that sent it to me
if you guys want to look through all the
primary documentation that that's
certainly fine and and I'm happy to do
it is that a lot of work to do Eric I
don't want to make more work I mean the
election one for sure I mean we can ask
for you know certain things when we get
to that point I mean I'm never you know
we've been pouring through these lines
and different you know information so
yeah I'd like to I thought the elections
it looks like it went up quite a bit and
you know that just came to mine off the
top of my head so yeah we could that
would be great if you could forward that
to us but I'm gonna do you want to go
ahead with where you were Eric you were
going to start talking about the the
capital lines I guess because those are
big ticket
items sure we can review capital I mean
I'm I'm available to review whatever it
is that you would like to review well
again yeah so the first thing I would
say is that the ones I would think we
don't want to touch are the fire engine
fund the Public Works equipment fund and
the bridge and Culver fund um and the
reason I say that is those three are
essentially
funds that are are or will be fully
taken up by existing
obligations um and by that I mean the uh
presuming we end up with a 10-year uh
loan on the fire engine that's about
$125,000 a year so that takes up the
majority of that fund the two existing
leases that the Public Works equipment
or Public Works has choose up basically
the entire Public Works equipment fund
and the bridge and Culvert fund is
enough to fund
uh next year in 2026 is the expected
replacement of the uh Lake
Road uh Culvert that's right next to
basa Road um so we we've been putting
money into that fund consistently for
the last five years so we have our share
because that's 50% State funding 50%
Town funding so that is what that line
item is um the rest you know we can
certainly talk about I mean contingency
I don't think we should lower I mean
right now we're our contingency budget
for the town is 0
4% um that's already pretty low I don't
realistically thinking you're going to
getting get it much lower than that and
that money goes right back into the
unexpended fund balance if it's not used
um you know the multi-use building fund
the rest of the
funds you know all can be trimmed to
some extent if that's what you want to
do I mean obviously we're projecting
putting another $100,000 into the AES
Capital fund um that's certainly
negotiable the building maintenance fund
even though we're trimming it from last
year that's negotiable um and if you
want to do less road work and less tree
work we can cut those funds too so if
you're going to make a a a change in the
budget that's probably where it's likely
to be if you're going to do something to
really equalize out funding Eric before
our next meeting I remember last year
you sent us the balance sheet like so we
were given what the current balance is
in all of those
funds yeah I'm pretty sure I sent all of
those to you about a month ago okay I'll
look that in the beginning of the month
um not I can certainly resend them I
don't believe we've made any changes
since I sent them out okay I can't get
in my town email can I just ask a quick
has anyone had trouble getting into your
town email and it's asked you for dual
authentication but then you're stuck
mine's working no you got fine yeah I
mean it's like at work I have to sign in
you know with codes and everybody's fine
okay hopefully by tomorrow I think
Kate's going to work on it for me but
yeah I I will look for those balances
Eric I don't want to make work for you
if we already have it I mean I've been
going through a bunch of the things um
and then I wanted to um can you it's
it's related but a little non-related I
know the big ticket item for AES with
getting those bathrooms
repaired um how much will that did we
have did you throw out a number of what
we think the repair will be I know we
have engineering and plans and have
okayed that but what will that repair
cost
ish well so
that's a moving Target so when we
originally talked about this and I
originally looked for a uh what's called
an MEP firm or a an engineering firm
that specializes mechanical electrical
and plumbing systems for buildings we
were looking at just a straight repair
you know doing what the minimum we could
to fix the problems and get the
bathrooms fully functional um it seems
like the school is shooting for a more
extensive renovation of the
bathrooms um you know so I don't want to
give you a number I think before if we
were doing the repairs making it fully
functional I could have easily seen that
coming in under
300K um what it's going to be now I I
don't have a an estimate for it not
going to be cheap though right for some
reason 250,000 was sticking in my head
but I wanted to know so we know that's
their huge I know that's number one on
their project list um I know there's
more okay thank you just wanted to know
that Joan I remember the same number in
my head as well you did yeah yeah I kind
of had that number in the back of my
head but I I think the the note that it
says here and they at the tri board
meeting they said they would have a a
plan to us um which we have not received
yet a fiveyear plan I believe is what
was asked for with the top three or four
priority items so um knowing how much to
fund you know that that line item that
$100,000 why I'm you know it makes sense
to me it'd be nice to have that Capital
plan that Capital spending plan to you
know take a look at that number right
there and see if we can still support
that or not so absolutely I I know they
yeah I guess it'd be nice to hear from
them earlier than
later I would think I'll reach out I
would think they had their budget
meeting or they had their their regular
monthly meeting last week the same night
we had our first joint meeting that and
I believe were going to go ahead and
officially pass you know or you know
their budget by the board of and usually
we will get an email from them
presenting it to us you know we've seen
drafts I know they have this posted
their regular budget but and then I
thought I saw something that they were
working on their their five-year Capital
plan so hopefully we'll see it soon Bill
thank you yeah because then we can kind
of prioritize because I know that's an
urgent need and I know they have a
couple other things the elevator I know
you know all the other I don't want to
speak for them get get myself in the
wrong but we'll wait and see that that
would be helpful to know that that's
good to know all right
um and Eric yeah thank you for going
over these I agree so I will look at the
balances too because I assume because
we've been putting in a certain amount
every year some of those balances are
higher and like you said I
mean I'm not talking about anything
specific but cuts are going to have to
come somewhere this year we're so I'm
that's why I kind of floated out my idea
of hopefully finishing some of the
projects that already are funded or
partially funed funded by grants because
we are going to have to look to to bring
that number down to a passable budget
the cuts are going to have to come
somewhere um but just yeah just remember
even if you knock the town budget down
to zero
that still only gets you
down uh somewhere to around a
6% uh mill rate increase so right you
know unless you're going to make the
town's budget significantly negative
you're not going to offset the increases
in the other two
entities um you know there's only so
much it's only you know slightly less
than a third of the total exactly no
understood Eric I wish and I'll I'll
publicly say as a member of the board of
Finance I don't mind saying this I'd say
this in public I mean I wish sometimes
that people would take a little bit of
time and think about the ram budget Ram
is a wonderful school and they do great
things you know my children graduated
from there did well but you know that
budget pretty much passes every year
without really being looked at like we
really look at all of these budgets so
you know with their enrollment down
significantly
in the past few years I mean I've had
towns people say this to me so I don't
mind publicly speaking it here since you
brought that up Eric would be nice if
one of these years maybe that didn't
pass and they were able to take a little
bit down they're not a huge part of you
know and over doesn't supply all the
kids there but um but anyways I I
understand that the town is a third of
the budget
so all right I don't know if we should
you know I don't want to again didn't
prepare to to run it but I maybe we
should take time to look at the calendar
dates I mean we're in over an hour here
um and so I don't know if we should you
know pick dates that we'd like to see
some of the Departments and then we can
Circle back and ask questions you know
definitely Public Works in the fire
department Eric do you think that's
something we could handle in one one
evening having them both present you
know talk to us or be available for
questions
or do you think they should stand
alone uh I think you could combine those
two if you wanted to have that
discussion
with uh both of
them um it just depends what
information you want to see I mean if
you if you have if you looked at the uh
capital budget that also has the
outlines of the uh roadwork plan in it
um I can certainly send you additional
documentation related to that it just
depends how much you know or what you
want to see um do you just want to talk
to J pudle the public work
supervisor um and then when it comes to
the fire
department are you looking at
discussing the operations side or are
you looking to discuss the capital side
because one might be the board of fire
Commissioners and the other one might be
talking to the actual fire chief so who
is it that you want to talk to good
point does anyone have an opinion on
that Kim I know you had questions
um what sure they they said that they
need some new equipment so I guess I'd
like to hear a little bit more about
that yeah that's the capital expense
that they brought before CIP for the new
year, yeah I think that that that's a
really really big deal in our budget um
so I just want to you know hear a little
bit more about that so I can make a good
decision about it I think it's really
important that's and Eric I believe go
and what I would would say is that the
two items that are going to chew up all
the money for the fire department are
one the new Squad vehicle um and we will
have to have a public meeting because
although it was approved to purchase it
you know what two years ago when it came
up um because it's going to end up being
financed um that will have to go to
public meeting um even though the
expenditure was approved because any any
financing requires town meeting um and
also the SCBA
has been on the fire department's
Capital plan um since I was original
member or since I was a member of the
CIP which is back six or seven years ago
probably seven years ago before I became
an administrator so this has been
something that they have has been on
their Capital request for a long time um
so I think you could simply ask them to
present you know to give you a current
cop copy of their 10-year Capital plan I
actually don't have a current the last
time they did one was about three years
ago um but I think that's a reasonable
request and they can supply
that hey Eric it's Liz um so I see here
where you say cire commission
spreadsheet um that's not included here
in this document is
it uh I don't think so I think I they
have
a the the the Fire Commission gave me a
standalone spreadsheet when they gave
their budget so what I ask every
Department to do is to fill out their
budget sheet and then give me a ex
explanation of what their budget is what
they're spending money on and what
they're accomplishing with it um I
rarely get that to be honest with you
most most departments you know it's a
struggle to get them to give me a budget
let alone anything else but in some
cases like the buyer commission usually
gives me a fair bit of information which
I'm happy to pass off on to you guys if
you want it yes please that would be
good yeah especially on the capital side
yeah definitely the big
purchases Eric that's a good qu we did
approve that did get approved for an
expenditure like you said the new fire
engine but nothing's been done with it
correct as far as it's not been ordered
or it is oh it's ordered ordered for a
year it's been ordered for a year to
okay yeah just like we have an ambulance
that's been on order for two years in
another two years we'll get it you know
we've approve these things and you
forget where they are in the pipeline
you know as far as I know the financing
and I know the public works and the
pieces of equipment there okay right all
right and then are we able to I know you
mentioned town meeting I know there's a
lot of things that have to be brought up
in town meeting will there be sort of a
combination town meeting in our near
future to approve some of these
things uh that is up to the board of
Selectmen I have been working with them
to try to come up with a date right when
because they need to hold a special
meeting to identif y a time to hold a
public meeting um there's a series of
things that really should go to public
meeting right um that just haven't yet
okay all right so my thoughts and moving
from here that would be great if at our
next meeting we could have that
information from the Fire Commission or
the you know the capital side um I don't
know if I'm calling it the right thing
um that would be good okay so next
weekend next when Wednesday you want to
hear from J our regular that's our
regular meeting do you all think I mean
since we're heavy into budget season I
mean I'd be willing to have it during
that meeting absolutely yep yep so yes
that would be that would done okay yeah
I'll line up Public Works in the fire
department that's for next next week
next week next Wednesday and Eric is
still like available there um so that's
good I mean we'll think on it Eric and
we can get you a list of um because I
think the superintendent Ram
superintendent wants to come to one of
our meetings to
present yeah yeah I guess if I was to
have any say in in the you know when
they come yeah I'd like hear from AES
before I mean we have really no input on
RAM right I mean true so AES is
something I think would be I'd love to
see their Capital plan um so that's
something I think we have to see earlier
than than Ram obviously the fire
department and Department of Public
Works if we get them next week and AES
the week after that and then Ram right
after that that'd be like my order I
guess heard I like that that makes
perfect sense and March 19th right they
had locked in for March 19th but we can
revisit that Kim who who who locked in
for the
19th yeah had requested the 19th but
that's kind of close to the end of our
process
I think that's too far down the road if
we can move that be very helpful yeah
just I'm not
sure how finished their budget is has
their Board of Ed ratified their budget
at this point and I don't know the
answer to that question I'll have are
they still discussing that it was
supposed to happen last Wednesday since
we had a meeting as well ER I don't know
if it did we haven't seen it come
through email like it normally does
right after they do that
so we'll find out that's good question I
know it's posted in a draft
form um we haven't received anything yet
so we'll check into all of that and good
point Bill sooner than later seeing that
and hearing their Capital plan and stuff
so we can work on that those are things
that can happen behind the scenes for
tonight um does anyone um have any other
things they want to talk about or any
thoughts on the budget process or
um you know we still have Cheryl here
I'll see I it's hard for me to see
everyone let me look down Joanne yes Li
this is Ann oh Ann sorry I've Lost You
Ann where are you go right ahead an all
right I understand the Board of Ed did
approve their budget last Wednesday I
haven't seen any of the figures either
but I understand that it did approve it
and um they don't have an exact amount
for the bathroom remodel yet because
still in the design phase um but they
think that with the Surplus they had
from last year and what's in their
account now it should cover most of that
so they don't have it in their budget to
uh ask for money for the the bathroom um
of course they do have other Capital
things coming down the line like the
elevator right and the parking lot so
that you know they do appreciate put
some money into their Capital fund
that's great thank you Ann thank you for
yeah I knew they had that meeting thank
you for giving us an update of what you
think uh we should be receiving as a
board that email pretty soon where the
superintendent will attach her her
letter and all of that so that's good um
uh that was a question I'm glad you said
the word Surplus earlier when someone
was talking that's what I wanted to ask
Eric um we know AES will get audited as
well and have a surplus and we have a
policy in place that if they want to
they have places they can put that money
into we've taken care of that Eric with
the I I know the audit probably hasn't
happened it isn't final and all of that
good stuff but there was you know talk
of having a surplus on the town side
that you've told us a couple times
correct sure we're in fact if you look
in the budget you can see where
estimating using
$190,000 of fund saw that Eric yep um
you know that's that's to bring down the
overall budget and the overall mill rate
there's a chance that can be at least
$100,000 higher than that but we need a
better indication from the auditor we
need to be long in the audit process
before that a determination to make it
higher than that is made
right but we may be able to to lower you
know the overall by you know at least
another
100,000 and I understand that and that's
why I wanted to make my point earlier
that you know the expense line and is up
so every year whether we can do things
to bring everything down and I'm glad I
mean when we're at the end and I thought
there was a talk of possibly 300,000 of
a surplus in that area maybe I'm wrong
with my figures um but we also know that
we can't count on that every year so
we're giving the taxpayers these
expenses so we have to do our best do we
know when we'll have a better idea about
that
Eric
uh I suspect sometime in in mid-march
we'll have a pretty good indication and
Cheryl may have a better you know
feeling for that than I um but they're
starting to do essentially diagnostic
testing and asking for
specific uh you know specific expenses
to look at so that usually means that
they've gone through all the capital and
all the little accounts um and now
they're you know they're comfortable
kind of with the main budget
expenditures and now they're testing to
make sure that that all the numbers
match but that's that's probably more a
Cheryl question than an Eric question
the um the Auditors were in the school
last week uh they were also in the town
um I had a meeting with our uh the
partner that not Mike but uh Caroline
she is our person we lost Sam so we have
a new person coming in so there's a
little bit of a learning curve for her
um everything that they've asked for
we've supplied and we're waiting for our
post retir M benefits the actuary has to
issue the report but that just
automatically that's just part of the
final audit package it's uh has to be
issued in order for them to issue but as
long as our financial statements are
ready to go we should have a better idea
on the potential return for fund
balance thank you great good to know
Eric another question that came up I'm
glad I thought of it I don't want the
meeting to go too lengthy tonight I know
we're going to have a lot of um can you
explain in a nutshell cuz someone had
asked me and I wasn't the town planner
person that we have and that we pay for
I think you have a line item of 48,000
this year in that place I again my eyes
cannot see this little thing um correct
and I know that in the past we have
there's a town plan require isn't there
a a required plan that the town has to
have and you have this person do it can
you just explain that but in a nutshell
just sure who our town planner is and
the services that he offers to the town
sure the town of Andover is way too
small to have our own town planner um so
we a two two and a half years ago the
town of Andover hired the firm Tai Chi
um and its principal John gusowski or
one of the principal Partners John
gusowski
to be as the town's Consulting Town
planner um and we did that because we
went out to RFP for a
consultant to do our uh
2025 or maybe 2026 depending on when it
actually gets out the door plan of
conservation and development um and we
had been budgeting money every year in a
PCD implementation fund except for
multiple years when the order to finance
cut that but that's a different story um
so we had a pool of money in the pocd
implementation fund so for the first two
years we offset part of the cost of
hiring the consulting firm um you know
with that what was called the PCD
implementation fund um and but it looks
like we're kind of out of that fund
money um so now we're paying the full
brunt of the cost for the Consulting
planner um and taii the firm
itself and is that someone that you call
on a lot I mean do does I know that I've
seen him in to meetings and I I like to
listen to him and his that it's a need
that we have a lot
of sure a high you know for a part-time
Consulting person I get it it's you know
it's a big ticket item that stands out
yeah it is it is a big ticket item
um you know it's one of those areas
where there's a huge again there's a
huge
Municipal uh shortage um that firm is
Consulting Town planners for probably
close to a dozen towns I mean this is
kind of what we're doing is exactly what
they do um you know because most of the
towns H have a full-time experienced
Town planner the cost basis for that
when when we looked into it was
somewhere between about aund and quarter
and
$170,000 a year so by using a firm you
know we get a really bright prinal um
and then we get his staff so you know
it's not 100% him doing the work for the
town um you know it's him plus all his
employees working um and the goal is
basically the PCD and then immediately
roll into implementing the pocd because
the important part is not ever having a
plan it's having a plan and then making
it work um and you could probably talk
to Ann cre about that because she's on
the Planning and Zoning commission so
she probably has has a fair bit of
interaction with them
also no I've heard him and seen him at
meetings no I
just you know for such a small town I
just wanted to just ask the question is
it a real need because it it's quite an
expense you know for a part-time
Consulting okay um with that can I ask a
question yes before you move on um yeah
so so what what line are we looking at
for that person that town
planner because that was a question that
I had is who is this person um I had
never known who it was um yeah
and and pardon my ignorance but what do
they what does what do they
do so the town planner it normally does
a number of things number one in a town
they're likely to be if not the
principal grant writer certainly one of
the one or two grant writers that a town
has um they are they interact very
heavily with the planning and zoning
commission um they attend all the
Planning and Zoning commission meetings
um and they interact with the other land
use boards also they're they're
basically their major role is to help
the town you know understand the
direction it needs to go as a town um
and develop the long-term planning for
the town of
Andover that's that's in a nutshell what
a what a town planner does um they often
have multiple roles most Town planners
also act act as the economic and
Community Development person um and John
does work with ourc to some extent um
you know he's worked with the uh
community center on developing
surveys um he and I co-wrote the the the
last uh grant that we got from uh well
he helped write our lsip application
which was a you know a $2.9 million
Transportation grant that we got um he
also helped write our wck Trails Grant
application um which we also got so it's
it's Planning and Development it's
Economic Development to some extent and
and it's grant writing those are kind of
the the two uh biggest ongoing things
and then
periodically somebody has to write a
series of plans take some of the edge
off before going to the O Okay um
somebody has to write a series of plans
um towns are legally obligated to have a
plan of conservation and development now
we're
obligated and give to the state a plan
I'm not sure if someone knows there some
interference in the background
someone so there's an affordable housing
plan that has to be written um you know
so he's going to be doing our affordable
housing plan and working on that so th
that's kind of the range of of what a
planner
does okay thank you so much so they are
involved in the affordable housing plan
too that he does work with that yeah our
our
previous Consulting planner was a guy
named Bill Warner uh and we actually
contracted him directly to write our
previous affordable housing plan but as
part of this plan of conservation and
development uh that has to be updated so
that will be handled by Tai Chi um you
know we've got a couple other
initiatives going um that are that will
be
incorporated one of them is what's
called The Vision zero plan and a plan
and both of those will be Tai cheese
product
bened
okay does anyone have background noise
on like a TV in the
background consensus on surgical
approach so thought it best you remove
myself is anyone else hearing that I'm
hearing yeah I think someone needs to
mute themselves please someone's got to
mute themselves yeah right I don't know
they're talking about medical stuff and
operation something the background so
that's
you please I'm trying sorry I'm trying
to get back on the meeting thing here
too jealous see it was disrespectful and
Reckless oh my go all right we'll give
it just a quick minute here for someone
to figure out
um all right trying to get back to where
we were take what you teach them and
eventually use it against you that's
right it become the competition whether
we want to admit that or
not don't know it's not me no I was
trying
to hopefully it's gone
sorry I'm trying to get back to the
correct screen to see all of you yeah
can you still hear me yes yeah yeah okay
good sorry we can we can continue I was
trying to make sure there was nothing
going on in the background but then I
lost my zoom screen thing
um hold on Zoom workplace please come
back
on I know as a Planning and Zoning
member yeah I we we use the planner a
lot in our meetings and he also works
with the um Economic Development
commission and talks with people that
are interested in doing work in town and
possibly open a business in town um it's
good to have him you know like with that
Dollar General came in and people felt
like oh my goodness what is this place
and if we had had John on at that time
which we didn't I don't think um he
could have been more involved with you
know communicating with them finding out
what their plans were and maybe changing
the design to fit it better with what
they wanted in town um there's a lot of
things you could do as far as developing
and that's what it's called the town
planner so we really like having them on
there the Planning and Zoning
commission okay and then I'm gonna so
thank you for that does anyone have any
further questions on the town
planner nope and the other item Eric I
saw on there just to to knock off a
quick couple tonight and then probably
end for the evening unless there's other
questions There Was You
I I know that at one point you know you
you have Kate sorry you have your
administrative assistant sure you know
the tax collector does her other you
know the job she was hired to do at
first when she came to town but then
there was you you were going to hire
someone else in your office has that
happened as far as uh what do I want to
say project manager I think is the term
so we've kind of come to terms with
somebody on what a contract is going to
look like um we're hiring a local
engineer to
oversee the uh playground um you know
pickle ball playground lighting and all
the improvements down at the athletic
fields and to basically be the town's
overseer or and towns rep on that
project so that's what that that's what
that line item in the budget last year
in carrying forward is for is because
the reality is I don't have the time to
do it um and what we're what we're
planning on doing is basically the town
act as the general contractor on that
project instead of subbing it out and
hiring a general contractor directly um
in in this environment we're in today
that's an incredible amount of paperwork
um and so so that's basically why we're
doing that because the paperwork mostly
will be
myself and uh Chris harkley will be the
two people dealing with the paperwork
but I don't want to be the person on the
ground um you know looking at the
contractors every day and doing the
paperwork I just don't have the time to
do it so that was the the goal was to
essentially SA
sacrifice my having a 19-hour a week
admin
assistant um in exchange for project
management Services um you know so and
that's been good and bad I would say I
mean Kate is competent but the reality
is you know her primary job is being the
tax collector and she fits admin
assistant work in um most of the time
you know during her workday um
occasionally out of hours um I called
her two hours ago and made her go back
into the town hall because I'm stuck at
home and I needed to get the zoom
information and her to set that up for
me um because I couldn't get out the
door because the flipping Amazon truck
is still stuck in my driveway um so so
it's good and bad um I definitely feel
the
loss of you know quite a few hours of
assistance that I had previously that I
don't have now but what I really need to
do is get the project management stuff
done no I appreciate that because I know
that's been talked about for a couple
years and and might as well get these
little questions out of the way um and
so do you feel like you have so in that
role because I know that's a stien role
you feel like you have you have enough
assistance from none of us work in the
town hall or anything like that we can
only assume so we've minimized that job
or made it smaller but do would that
have benefited so she's doing that like
you said everybody's making it work I
guess but you feel the need to have that
you feel like this year would be the
year you're filling that project manager
position because then that will help you
move these projects along and that will
be the the only reason
we haven't done that up to this point is
we're still not through planning and
doning and we still don't actually have
project approvals and then it's going to
take another two or three months to get
through the Connecticut you know uh the
Department of Labor and all the state
agencies because they're the funding
agencies to get final
approvals um you know
so if we were farther along in the
project she would already be hired in
working but she's not because you know
we're not right you don't need her until
you need the person I get that all right
pivoting from that I wonder is Chris
still on the meeting and I appreciate
all the time that Cheryl and Chris have
been no I'm sorry she just lost her
internet connection she sent me a text
so and I don't blame her at all like I
didn't expect her to stay this long I
can ask you Cheryl actually it's better
for you because I
know I feel like that's a hardworking
department and we appreciate you know
everything you've done since you came on
board with straightening out the finance
not that there isn't every Department's
hard sorry I only know what I know you
know so we're so grateful that you came
on straightened out the books and have
our you know everything's moving forward
and then I remember I know that that
position you know now that she's not
here and I can't talk directly that
position um is a 30h hour a week
position sometimes I feel bad from all
that's asked of that
position I understand that the person in
the position likes those hours and you
know doesn't really want to extend the
hours but is is the job more you know
it's a lot for what she you know for 30
hour week is what I'm trying to say she
does payroll she does all the payables
she's helping with the spreadsheet what
is your thought if you know could that
have been an expanded
role you might have to have an expanded
role if you had a person who was less
qualified right I mean when you knew
when you know how to do your job you
know how to do your job yeah so I mean
we could have we we were very lucky to
get Chris um
she's meticulous if you ask her for
something she can get it for you
everything's filed the Auditors are
happy I'm happy
no I remember the two of you we
consulted when we when she you know it
was great having your input when she was
getting hired and I know you thought
highly of her and it seems to it's
worked out great you know that
department seems to be doing well um so
well because of both of you but I
sometimes feel bad I feel like there's
so much asked of her but she like you
said she does her job she's happy with
that thank you thank you for your
opinion on that yeah okay I don't want
to to does anyone else on the board have
anything else they'd like to ask tonight
um we really really appreciate Cheryl
and Chris taking time out of their
schedules to join us tonight and we
really appreciate you representing the
board of Selectmen in this first year of
this new system and you joining us and
your input um and I just wanted to say
that but I want to open it up for final
questions I'm looking I'm trying to
scroll down to see if I
see um I I can ask for one thing um can
we Cheryl can Cheryl and Eric I guess um
can you resend that tab after you guys
take a look at that employee cost tab or
whatever or I guess as quickly as you
can uh return the amended or corrected
worksheet so that we can all kind of get
back and look at the numbers a little
more closely yes of
course thanks so
much and sorry one final one came to me
Eric because the people are going to be
here and I I can put myself out there
but I'm not going to ask in front of
them this particular question
because I understand unions and Union
contracts and everything is set in stone
you know I understand that and I I agree
with it with these changes that were
asked that weren't union g generated
like do we automatically have to approve
it or do we have some say so in that
such as like a promotion or things of
that nature when it's you know not
contract
driven I know that we generally so give
me
AIC because so there's two things one if
it is an elected official that is the
board of selectman's decision full
not correct sorry that is the board of
finances decision Full Stop on salaries
uh for elected
officials um if it is
a uh a non-elected official it's the
board of Selectmen that determines pay
in compensation for
employees but the board of Finance can
certainly fund or defund
things um
you know as you desire and then
it's you know then it's my job and the
board's job to figure out how to
accommodate
that okay so you don't get to say ex
employee is only going to make you know
$16.24 an hour but you can say we're
going to fund the building department at
this for instance and then you know we
we accommodate that however we
can okay but did you follow my line of
questioning when a like say a promotion
is thought of or brought forward is that
automatic
or no I mean what so I assume you're
probably talking about a public works
employee so well because I I put myself
out there and and I don't mind you know
this is why I'm on the board and I
talked about it last week yes with the
coming on board for a certain position
because that's what was sought at the
time you know and then the next year
there's a big change already yeah so
what happens is you know there is a
series a level of experience and a skill
set at each level of maintainer in our
budget you know we essentially have
three uh steps we have maintainer one
maintainer 2 and maintainer three yeah
um so a maintainer to is essentially
somebody that can successfully operate
every piece of
equipment uh Public Works has work
independently and handle most uh most
things that Public Works does um so
ordinarily you know we try try to
hire young people for these jobs so we
can them as for a long time but the
reality is the last two hires we've made
um we haven't had anybody that met the
minimum
qualifications to get the job which is
the a minimum of having a CDL license um
and being capable of doing some things
um apply so we've ended up hiring people
that were in fact very experienced
operators um our last person that we
hired as a maintainer one um previously
worked for the public works department
for four or five years full-time and
worked part-time for the public works
department for another 15 or 20 years um
as a winter plow driver and the town sub
contracted with that individual as a
heavy equipment operator um you know for
many years so we were able to get
somebody that was quite experienced yeah
and I I so get that again I try to be
really neutral in all of this because
I'm a per people person and I get it you
know as a union person that had to start
at the bottom at a really high skill
level already just because I wanted to
you know for whatever life reasons
people have so you know I don't mind
throwing myself in there even though I
could have been qualified for like the
highest position so I'm just being the
voice of the people out there that we
did hire someone that willfully came
into a position knowing what it paid
knowing what it was and what the town
thought they were getting at the time
and so when we see a 12 or
$133,000
increase you know
that's I have to ask the questions
because it's not what other towns do
they just don't whether you just have to
buide your time I'm glad that the town
has all these skillful people and they
need them and they wanted the two groups
of four you know they wanted four guys
so I had to ask the question if it's
something that we automatically have to
just you know I can understand from the
town side and management side maybe why
they're doing this so I just wanted to
know from our role because it's a big
chunk if it's something we automatically
have to approve of again it's a hard
position I'm putting myself out there
I'm just being the voice
of the people and having being on your
side being a manager and having a bunch
of Union people that you oversee it'd be
hard for me to to see other people not
wanting to do the same thing it just
creates kind of that kind of thing but I
thank you thank you for answering it so
the answer to your question is no you
don't if you choose not to budget for it
you choose not to budget for it and he
doesn't get promoted you can't promote
him if the funds aren't there to pay for
it so that's your
answer thank you yeah yeah thank you um
moving forward any last questions from
anyone I
think I'm all set I know we have our
regular meeting everyone next Wednesday
we'll see those couple departments that
we asked Eric for um and we'll take it
from there does anyone want to make an
up and thank you again Cheryl if you're
still there I can't see everyone's name
we really appreciate your time tonight
you're welcome you're welcome okay um
anyone ready to make a motion to adjourn
I'll make a motion to adjourn okay
Louise is making the motion to adjourn
who's second in Kim I'll second it thank
you Kim person thanks everyone one I
know it was kind of on the Fly tonight
but appreciate all the time and we'll
hopefully have Mark back next week when
we discuss this further see you then all
in bye good night
hi all who favor say I hi oh
whoops thank you for that I forgot a
step that's okay um everybody was waving
all right peace out